Directions:  Complete the following questions using your notes.     

1.  Define system.  Compare an open and closed system.

An open system is made up of four parts, Atmosphere that defines the earths air, Hydrosphere that defines the earths water surface, Biosphere that defines Earths living things, and Geosphere that defines Earth's rocks, soil and interior.

 

While a closed system is the whole earth combined with these four parts, Atmosphere, Hydrosphere, Biosphere and Geosphere.

2.  Name the four parts of the Earth system.  List one fact about each part that scientists learned through modern technology.  
Atmosphere, Hydrosphere, Biosphere and Geosphere.

Atmosphere : It is found out that  our Atmosphere is made up of 78% nitrogen and 21-22% oxygen, while there are some gases found up the Atmosphere such as

carbon dioxide and water vapor 

 

Hydrosphere :  it is found out on our planet that Earth is covered by nearly three quarters of water,

3% of the water is fresh and 70% are frozen in glaciers and polar ice caps. 27%? where it went?

 

Biosphere : Scientist found out on how the biosphere interacts with the other parts of the Earth system, they also use satellite to track changes in the earth's living things.

 

Geosphere : It is found out that the earth constantly changes when there is volcanic eruption happening, when new islands form, with our new technology aswell

it made less complicated to study some materials like rocks on the geosphere.

3.  Give an example of how the Earth system’s four parts can interact with each other.

When water evaporated from hydrosphere to atmosphere, When wind from the atmosphere created large waves on the beaches and ocean (hydrosphere), When living things (biosphere) collect water from the hydrosphere or the water that came from the rain (atmosphere)  volcanic activity from geosphere, when ashes fall from the atmosphere.

4.  One day, you see that plants are dying in your terrarium.  What part might be missing from its system? 

If there is no component of hydrosphere (water) it might die, if there is no component of geosphere (soil), it might die aswell, or if you expose it to alot of heat for nonstop hours outside (atmosphere).

5.  You visit a park and see a think rock wall with a hole worn through it, which of the four parts of the Earth system might have made the hole?  Explain.

biosphere (living thing) might have created the hole, because it would be almost impossible for a hydrosphere (water), geosphere (rock), or atmosphere (wind) to make a hole on

the rock at the park, but I can give some examples of a component of geosphere making a hole on that rock, possibly a human (biosphere) using a tool to make a hole on the rock

that is made up of a material that came from the geosphere, like metal, gold or maybe rock.

